I. The Occasion

Thus I once heard:

a) [Qualities of the place (sthānasaṃpad):] The Lord was staying in Rājagṛha [House of the King, the great town of Rājagṛ
ha, or, in the highest meaning (paramārthatas), the place of the Awakened Lord who is the king of religion (dharmarāja),
namely the pure sphere of all moments of existence (viśuddhadharmadhātu) ], [that house (gṛha) has seven characteristic
s, namely 1. profoundness (gaṃbhīralakṣaṇa), in being]the place of the Tathāgatas [uninterrupted by objects and forms (ā
lambanākārāparicchinna) like the sphere of empty space (ākāśadhātu) ]a round citadel adorned with jewels [which are the 
qualities of a Buddha, or the outcome of his powers][3. being adopted (parigṛhītalakṣaṇa), that is, blessed by the prese
nce of the Tathāgatas, and thus] the dwelling place of all the Tathāgatas[and 4. the quality of cause (hetusaṃpallakṣaṇa
) being] the great accumulation of the adornments of merit [and knowledge immeasurable, which is cause of the sphere of 
all moments of existence (dharmadhātu) ][5. the quality of fruit (phalasaṃpallakṣaṇa) being] the outcome of great practi
ce, and produced through maturation of all the qualities of a Buddhaand [6. spaciousness (vistīrṇalakṣaṇa) as it is] the
home of the great bodhisattvas[and 7. the quality of magic (ṛddhisaṃpallakṣaṇa) ] displaying infinitely the sphere of a
ll moments of existence;[that magic being of nine kinds: (a) the magic of appearance and change (nirmāṇapariṇāmarddhi):]
blessed with the presence of the magic of the Tathāgatas [thus making the inexistent exist, and changing base things li
ke stone and wood into precious things like gold, silver and jewels) ];[ (b) the magic of being the basis of no vices (n
iṣkleśāśrayarddhi):] the way into the field [namely the sphere of all moments of existence (dharmadhātu) ] through unatt
ached knowledge;[ (c) the magic of splendour (prabhāsvararddhi):] the source of great happiness [producing joy in living
beings];[ (d) the magic of not being mistaken (aviparyāsarddhi):] the way into recollection, intelligence and understan
ding [of religion];(e) the magic of beauty (śobhanarddhi) never to be derided [by anyone][ (f) the magic of the intentio
n to teach disciples according to their individual needs (prayojanarddhi):] consideration through wisdom;[and (g) the ma
gic of enjoying the religion of the great way (mahāyānadharmaparibhogarddhi):] the way into understanding not attached t
o that [viz. the activity of the above-mentioned wisdom, nor to the activity of worldly knowledge (lokajñānavicāra) ];[ 
(i) the magic of continuity (apratiprasrabdharddhi):] to be praised through future world-ages [never being bereft of tha
t kind of magic];[ (h) the magic accompanied by joy (sukhasaṃpannarddhi):] an immeasurable multitude of all good qualiti
es [the worldly and unworldly qualities like recollection (smṛti), etc., the wings of awakening (bodhipakṣika), the powe
rs and intrepidities (balavaiśāradya), etc., the qualities of the Buddhas].

b) [Qualities of the teacher (śāstṛsaṃpad):] The Lord had fully woken up to the fact that all moments of existence are of
the same character, he had set the wheel of religion in motion (supravartitadharmacakro), training endless hosts of pup
ils (’nantaśiṣyagaṇasuvinītaḥ), having attained mastery over all moments of existence (sarvadharmavaśitāprāptaḥ),he had 
set the wheel of religion in motion,training endless hosts of pupils,having attained mastery over all moments of existen
ce,knowing well all kinds of intentions in living beings,having obtained exquisite abilities of perception, etc.,skilful
in subduing the habits of vice which are connections [to new births] in all beings,never ceasing to perform his effortl
ess Buddha-activities.

c) [Qualities of the congregation of monks (śrāvakaparṣatsaṃpad):] With him was a great congregation of six million monks
,all of them with disciplined minds,free [from the obscurations of vices (kleśāvaraṇa) ] in thought because of right kno
wledge [of the four noble truths],making efforts to subdue all habits of vice which are connections [to new births],sons
of the Tathāgata, the king of religion,skilled in behaving according to the deep religion of the Buddha,perfected in th
e moments of existence beyond objectification,perfected by their gracious behaviour,very worthy of gifts [as the fruit o
f giving to them will be great],punctilious in following the instructions of the Tathāgata.

d) [Qualities of the congregation of bodhisattvas (bodhisattvaparṣatsaṃpad):] With him was also a great congregation of b
odhisattvas.The bodhisattvas, the great beings, had assembled from different Buddha-fields and they were innumerable, th
eir number was infinite, immeasurable, unthinkable, beyond measure, unspeakableThey were possessed of the power to pass 
through infinite Buddha-fields in an instant [to hear teachings in the presence of Tathāgatas], and thus skilled in comi
ng and going,ready to pay homage to and serve all the Tathāgatas,untiring in the quest to hear the religion of the Buddh
a,constantly striving to bring all beings to spiritual maturity,having attained the highest in skill in means and insigh
t,established in unobstructed liberation and wisdom,transcending all thought-constructions, fictions and discursive thin
king,near the stage of omniscience [the fruit, the stage of a Buddha]They were the bodhisattva Vidyuddeva, the bodhisatt
va Yuddhajaya, the bodhisattva Vairocanagarbha, the bodhisattva Parākramavikrama, the bodhisattva Vimatisamudghātin, the
bodhisattva Vighuṣṭaśabda, the bodhisattva Vyavalokanacakṣur, the bodhisattva Vigatatamas, the bodhisattvas Maitreya an
d Mañjuśrī and so on, with innumerable bodhisattvas, great beings whose number was immeasurable, beyond measure, unthink
able, unequalled, incomparable, peerless, infinite, unspeakable, again unspeakable.

