(p. 122) 33rd Imperishable: Accumulation of Knowledge.

What then is the bodhisattvas’ imperishable accumulation of knowledge?The bodhisattva accumulates the causes and conditio
ns by which he reaches knowledge [beyond duality (advayajñāna) ].Which causes, which conditions?

[The causes (hetu) are:] Deep eagerness in seeking knowledge [by eagerness and exertion in writing out and reading books,
etc. (pustakalekhāpāṭhādicchanda’udyoga) ];always serving, living with and attending spiritual friends who have attaine
d knowledge.He relies on the knowledge of the Buddha, not on the knowledge of the disciples and the isolated buddhas.It 
is absence of conceit towards and love for those spiritual friends like love for the masters, like love for the Teacher 
himself.The spiritual friends, having ascertained that the listener has good intentions [that he will not seek religion 
desiring gain and honour (lābhasatkāra), but will seek knowledge beyond duality (advayajñāna) ], bring about conversatio
n [teaching (1) the moments of existence to be taught (deśyadharmadeśanā), the twelvefold Word (dvadaśâṅgapravacana) ] a
nd speech concerned with knowledge [giving (2) teachings on the moments of existence to be accomplished (sādhyadharmadeś
anā), explaining the causes (hetu), emptiness (śūnyatā) and so on, teachings which bring about knowledge beyond duality 
(advayajñāna) ],knowing he is a worthy recipient they unceasingly teach religion which is not concerned with outer thing
s [like the manuals of the outsiders (bāhyakaśāstravyākaraṇa), but giving (3) teachings on the moments of existence to b
e attained (anugantavyadharmadeśanā), thus always teaching the moments of existence which are the wings of awakening (bo
dhipakṣyadharma) ].

[The conditions (pratyaya) are:] Having heard these religious teachings [of the above-mentioned three kinds, being causes
(hetu), from spiritual friends] he [the person seeking religion] makes an effort to accumulate religious teachings, and
the effort to accumulate religious teachings is his accumulation of knowledge.What then is the effort to accumulate rel
igious teachings?

[1. Undertakings being causes of knowledge (hetvārambha):] Having few things for the benefit of oneself;doing few [worldl
y] things [like commerce and agriculture];being moderate in speech;having few necessities of life;making an effort at pr
actising vigilance in the beginning and end of the night;reflecting on the meaning of what one has heard;seeking it more
and more;no confusion in thought;suppression of hindrances;knowing the way out of the sinful;no remorse;no manifestatio
n of vices;firmness in realization [not being content with the words only, but striving to accomplish the religious teac
hings as they have been heard];inclination towards religion [in grasping the words (vākya) of the teaching explained at 
the time of hearing (śrutakāla) ];proneness to religion [finding the meaning in the teachings heard (śrutadharmârtha) at
the time of pondering (cintākāla) ];propensity to religion [in approaching the fruit (phala) by repeated meditation (bh
āvanā) on the meaning found by pondering (cintā) ],perfection in courage [not being overcome by the contraries of vices,
etc. (kleśâdivipakṣa) ];being like one whose head and clothes are on fire in seeking knowledge;but not attached to any 
of these [things in the way of not apprehending (anupalambha) them, not being attached to material things (āmiṣa) ];no l
oose morality;never putting the burden down;gaining distinction [in growing];avoiding crowds;finding joy in solitude;hav
ing the mind bent on solitude in the woods;content with the family of the holy;never unstable with regard to the qualiti
es of purification;joy consisting in pleasure in the joy of religion;forgetting worldly incantations;seeking the supramu
ndane moments of existence;unwavering recollection;being in accordance with understanding the meaning [in thinking in ac
cordance with the sphere of all moments of existence (dharmadhātu) ];being in accordance with the way through intelligen
ce;keeping vows with steadfastness;accordance with knowledge by conditions [that is, knowledge in accordance with the pr
inciple of dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda), or, accumulating the causes of knowledge beyond duality (advayajñā
nahetu) by knowing the essential character of the moments of existence which is dependent origination (dharmāṇāṃ pratīty
asamutpādalakṣaṇajñānena) ];being adorned with shame and modesty [and thus doing no sin through having regard for onesel
f and others].[2. Undertakings concerned with the essence of knowledge (svabhāvârambha):] Making it the most important t
hing to be in accordance with knowledge [seeking it in any practice whatsoever];suppressing ignorance;purification of th
e eye of insight for those tied down by the darkness and blindness of ignorance and delusion;purity in understanding [no
hindrances concerning things to be known or vices];broadness in understanding [having the Great Way in scope (mahāyānâl
ambanatayā) ];no narrowness in understanding [siding with the small way (hīnayāna) ];no divided understanding [no attach
ment to various kinds of viewpoints (dṛṣṭi) ];illuminated understanding [because of original purity (prakṛtiviśuddhi) ];
immediate knowledge [unhindered in the three times].

[3. Undertakings which are fruits of knowledge (phalārambha):] Not to depend on the qualities of others [but obtaining go
od qualities oneself],no haughtiness because of one’s own qualities [having really obtained them];and praising the quali
ties of others [having no envy (īrṣyā) ] (p. 123);doing good actions;never freeing oneself from the burden of maturing o
ne’s actions [even though understanding the state of emptiness (śūnyatādharma), he accepts the maturation of actions];kn
owledge of the purification of actions. [These are the conditions (pratyaya) ].

This, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is called the bodhisattvas’ imperishable accumulation of knowledge.

Further, the accumulation of knowledge is of four kinds [that is, the causes producing knowledge (jñānotpādahetu) are of 
four kinds]. What four?

These four gifts augment the accumulation of knowledge. What four?The gift of birch-bark for writing, ink and books to th
e preachers of religion;different kinds of teaching thrones to the preachers of religion;giving all gain, honour and pra
ise to the preachers of religion;giving compliments without guile to the preachers of religion to grasp religion [onesel
f].Those four gifts augment the accumulation of knowledge.

These four kinds of protection augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?Protecting the preachers of
religion like protecting a lord [or protecting them for fear of kings (rājabhaya) ];protecting [their] roots of good;pr
otecting [the preachers of religion when they travel in] kingdoms and among peoples;protecting the beneficial things.Tho
se four augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

These four kinds of support augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?Supporting the preachers of re
ligion with material things;supporting them because of religion [to prolong the existence of true religion (saddharmacir
asthitikatā) ];supporting them because of insight [so that their insight is not lost];supporting them because of knowled
ge [so that their knowledge grows and is not lost].Those four augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

These five powers augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What five?The power of faith for confidence;the po
wer of vigour for seeking learning;the power of recollection so as not to forget the thought of awakening;the power of c
oncentration to have thoughts always reflecting on universal sameness;the power of insight for the sake of power of lear
ning [so as to understand the teachings (dharma) ].Those five powers augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge
.

These four kinds of morality augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?The morality of joy in religi
on;the morality of seeking religion [through spiritual friends, listening to their teachings, writing and reading them];
the morality of reflecting on religion [with logic (yukti) ];the morality of transforming into awakening.Those four kind
s of morality augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

These four kinds of tolerance augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?Tolerating bad speech [which
enumerates bad qualities (doṣa) behind one’s back (parokṣāt) ] and abusive speech [uttered to one’s face (sākṣāt) ] thr
ough striving to seek religion;tolerating wind, sun, cold, heat, thirst and hunger through striving to seek religion;tol
erance in accordance with teachers and preceptors [enduring pain to act according to their instructions] through strivin
g to seek religion;tolerance of moments of existence as being emptiness, beyond distinguishing marks and beyond longing,
through striving to seek religion.Those four kinds of tolerance augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

(p. 124) These four kinds of vigour augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?The vigour to hear [ma
ny books (grantha) ];the vigour to retain in mind [their meaning (artha) ];the vigour to teach [others the teachings one
has heard and grasped];the vigour to progress spiritually [cultivating by meditation the teachings].Those four kinds of
vigour augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

These four limbs of meditation augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?Staying [bodily] in solitud
e;one-pointedness [of thought];seeking supernormal knowledge in meditation;relying on the Buddhas’ knowledge [not that o
f disciples and isolated buddhas].Those four limbs of meditation augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

These four lights of insight augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?Not behaving according to the
view of annihilation;not entering into the view of eternity;not being in contradiction with dependent origination;toler
ating absence of a self [without fear].Those four lights of insight augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

These four kinds of expedient means augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?Accordance with the wo
rld;accordance with religion;accordance with living beings;accordance with knowledge [of omniscience].Those four kinds o
f expedient means augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

These four ways augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?The way of the perfections;the way of the 
stages;the way of the wings of awakening;the way to knowledge of omniscience.Those four ways augment the bodhisattvas’ a
ccumulation of knowledge.

These four kinds of never having enough augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge. What four?Never having enoug
h of learning;never having enough of teaching;never having enough of examining things;never having enough of knowledge.T
hose four kinds of never having enough augment the bodhisattvas’ accumulation of knowledge.

Further, the accumulation of knowledge is to be in accordance with all living beings [not forsaking existence (saṃsāra) s
o as to work the weal of living beings (sattvārtha) with the form of great compassion (mahākaruṇārūpeṇa) ], but also to 
be in accordance with all religious things [even though in this way not forsaking existence (saṃsāra), not being in oppo
sition to extinction (nirvāṇa), not forgetting extinction, in short, teaching the extinction which is found nowhere (apr
atiṣṭhitanirvāṇa) ].

The accumulation of knowledge should be seen as arising from generosity, and in the same way the accumulation of knowledg
e should be seen also as arising from morality, tolerance, vigour, meditation and insight;the accumulation of knowledge 
should be seen as arising from friendliness, compassion, joy and equanimity.

Why [do the above-mentioned things (dharma) become the accumulation of knowledge]?All the bodhisattvas’ undertakings [men
tioned supra by name (nāmagrāhika) p. 122,18-123,4 and divided into 1) undertakings which are causes of knowledge (hetvā
rambha), 2) undertakings concerned with the essence of knowledge (svabhāvârambha) and 3) undertakings which are fruits o
f knowledge (phalārambha) ] originate through knowledge because they are preceded by knowledge [making knowledge the mos
t important (jñānapara) ], because they rely on knowledge, and depend on knowledge of omniscience [by way of having it a
s the object (ālambana) ].It [the accumulation of knowledge] is the support of all who know,in it none of the Evil Ones 
will find a weak spot,here all the worthy receptacles of the Buddhas’ religion are present, and they attain the blessing
of the Buddhas, they attain omniscience [being furnished with the causes (hetu) that bring omniscience about].

This is the imperishability of knowledge’s accumulation.(p. 125) These, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are called the bodhisatt
vas’ imperishable accumulation of merit and knowledge.

